# Cryptomania
[Neel Kashkari](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neel_Kashkari), the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, said recently, "Cryptocurrencies are ninety-five percent fraud, hype, noise and confusion." As a cryptocurrency enthusiast, and an observer of the space since 2017, I think Kashkari has it wrong. I think it is more like ninety-nine percent (stick around till the end for a treatment of the one percent that is not).

# Blockchain
Take [blockchain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain), for example; perhaps the most over-hyped buzzword in the crypto lexicon. Blockchain was invented (or, more precisely, cobbled together from a bunch of existing inventions) for a very specific use case&mdash;[Bitcoin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitcoin). It has since become the engine on which thousands of copycat cryptocurrencies (known as [*altcoins*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptocurrency#Altcoins)) run.

Yet blockchain is being touted by experts&mdash;hailing primarily from the finance industry&mdash;as the 21<sup>st</sup> century equivalent of the automobile, the airplane, the internet or *insert-civilization-changing-technology-here*. Forget about cryptocurrency, they say; focus instead on the great promise of the blockchain (as if *the* blockchain were a single, canonical entity&mdash;it's not).

To me, this is a bit like somebody in the year 1900 saying that, twenty years from now, no one will remember the automobile; what they will remember is the internal combusion engine! To be crystal clear, blockchain is the internal combustion engine on which cryptocurrency runs. Throw out cryptocurrency, and that engine is not particularly useful.

What makes blockchain useful for cryptocurrency, in particular, is the [*consensus algorithm*](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/consensus-mechanism-cryptocurrency.asp) that guarantees the blockchain's integrity as an immutable transaction ledger (immutable transaction ledgers are the sine qua non of *any* functioning currency, digital or otherwise).

From the combination of blockchain *and* its consensus algorithm emerges something greater than the sum of its parts. Without a compelling consensus algorithm&mdash;a feature lacking in every *non*&ndash;cryptocurrency use case I have yet seen proposed&mdash;blockchain is not a panacea, but rather just a really inefficient database.

# Altcoin
If the defining characteristic of blockchain is Kashkari's *hype*, then the explosion of altcoins takes the prize for *fraud, noise and confusion*. An altcoin is any one of hundreds of thousands&mdash;yes, *hundreds of thousands*!&mdash;of cryptocurrencies besides Bitcoin. Why is Bitcoin *not* in this category, and all the others are? Because Bitcoin was the *first* cryptocurrency; all others that followed&mdash;the altcoins&mdash;are copycats.

*Ether*, which is the coin native to the [Ethereum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethereum) blockchain, is perhaps the best-known of the copycat cryptocurrencies, and arguably the most reputable. Unlike Bitcoin, however, whose purpose is purely as an alternative to traditional (namely [fiat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiat_money)) currency, Ether is not strictly speaking a cryptocurrency. Rather, it is a remunerative token (i.e., a unit of value), designed to compensate participants in an ecosystem with goals much different from, and much broader than, those of Bitcoin ([*decentralized finance*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decentralized_finance) to name just one).

It is for this reason that Ether should have any value at all; and not, like Bitcoin, purely as an alternative to traditional currency. Of course, this distinction has not deterred speculators from conflating the two, and gobbling up Bitcoin *and* Ether (and many others) alike in hopes of getting rich quick.

The foregoing defense of Ether notwithstanding, the vast majority of altcoins (like 99.999%) are indeed, as Kashkari put it, the stuff of fraud, noise and confusion. Acutely aware of this fact, savvy crypto observers have coined (see what I did there?) a fitting term for them: [*shitcoins*](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/shitcoin.asp).

# Shitcoin
The vast majority of bona fide shitcoins owe their existence to a shady practice known as an [*initial coin offering*](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/i/initial-coin-offering-ico.asp), or ICO (a variation of initial *public* offering, or IPO; a term borrowed from the world of finance, presumably to lend credibility to the less reputable variety).

An ICO works something like this: Someone with nothing better to do conjures up a silly name, the more meme-worthy the better, and sticks the word coin on the end of it (some notable examples include *SEC* coin, *Elon* coin, *StopElon* Coin, *Panda* coin, *Shib* coin, *Cat* coin and the semi-profane *ASS* coin). Then, using a user-friendly and publicly available [API](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API), the shitcoin inventor sets it loose on an existing blockchain, say Ethereum (because building a blockchain takes a surprising amount of work). Next, he convinces as many of his social-media followers as possible that the price of his coin will go parabolic so, *buy in while you still can, so you can cash in on 1,000% profit*! Of course, this is precisely what an astounding number of financial geniuses do, indeed causing the price to rise astronomically. At just the right moment, the ICO grifter&mdash;and likey a small cabal of his co-conspirators&mdash;dumps his holdings and reaps a massive profit, leaving the suckers penniless.

Sound ridiculous? It is, and it should. Yet this pattern&mdash;or some variation of it&mdash;has played out hundreds, if not thousands, of times in the recent years. The aforementioned Dogecoin&mdash;named after a Shiba Inu cartoon dog meme&mdash;was literally created to satirize this ridiculous state of affairs. Yet Dogecoin's market capitalization exceeded $85 billion in May 2021! (Can you say StopElon coin?) Seems the adage *there's a sucker born every minute* was a massive understatement.

# Bitcoin
At the outset I wrote that ninety-nine percent of cryptocurrency is hype, fraud, noise and confusion. That means I believe there is one percent that isn't. That one percent is Bitcoin. Bitcoin was around long before cryptocurrency spilled over into popular culture, metastasizing into altcoins, ICOs, [non-fungible tokens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-fungible_token) and god-knows-what next. And Bitcoin will be around long after the hype has subsided. Following are few reasons why:

***Bitcoin is durable.*** When I say Bitcoin will be around long after the hype has subsisded, it is because Bitcoin is as durable as the internet. Any entity&mdash;say, a government&mdash;that would like to "shut down", or otherwise ban, Bitcoin, has as much chance of succeeding as they would shutting down or banning the internet&mdash;it hasn't happened yet and, even if it were possible, it ain't likely to. This goes for altcoins, too, by the way, but durability is a feature that must be pointed out.

***Bitcoin is simple.*** Bitcoin is a crypto*currency*, plain and simple. It doesn't pretend to be anything else, nor does its protocol allow it to be. Moreover, the simplicity of its design makes it resistant to hacking or theft (any software engineer will tell you complexity is the enemy of correctness). High-profile hacks of Bitcoin [*exchanges*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptocurrency_and_crime#Exchanges) should not be confused with hacks of Bitcoin itself; this is a fallacy. Bitcoin itself&mdash;the blockchain, the protocol, the infrastructure&mdash;has not been hacked since it went live in January 2009.

***Bitcoin is scarce.*** The Bitcoin protocol imposes an upper limit on the number of bitcoin that can ever be minted, or [*mined*](https://www.investopedia.com/tech/how-does-bitcoin-mining-work/) (that limit is twenty-one million bitcoin). Bitcoin is therefore *deflationary*, meaning that its value cannot be debased by arbitary or indiscriminate expansion. This is not the case with fiat currencies such as USD (consider for a moment that [eighty percent of every dollar](https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/M1SL) that ever existed has been printed since Januray 2020!).

***Bitcoin is frictionless.*** Many argue that Bitcoin lacks *intrinsic* value. The simple counter to that argument is, what is the intrinsic value of a 20-dollar bill, or an ounce of gold? (If the answer to the first question is, the full faith and credit of the United States government, consult the previous paragraph.) The more complicated answer is the better one, though. Bitcoin's intrinsic value is its ability to be transferred to anyone on the planet instantly, without delay, institutional red tape or fees.

***Bitcoin is a hedge.*** Anyone who believes the US dollar will exist in perpetuity as the world's reserve currency, thereby forever guaranteeing its value relative to other fiat currencies, need only look at the the history of the Spanish dollar, the British pound or the Dutch guilder. In the year 2019, how many people would have believed you if you told them a pandemic deadlier than the Spanish flu would soon sweep the globe? Very few. Human beings are remarkably poor intuitive statisticians; it is hard for us believe as possible anything that has not already occurred in our lifetime.

I am a believer in Bitcoin; what some might refer to as a *Bitcoin maximalist*. As such, what I fear is that Bitcoin's perceived value will collapse under the weight of the ninety-nine percent of cryptocurrency that is hype, fraud, noise and confusion. Such a fate would be undeserved and undignified for what is one of the most ingenious inventions of the 21<sup>st</sup> century.

I am not betting on this, by the way; I am long Bitcoin. And even if I am wrong, and my position plummets, my Bitcoin will always be my Bitcoin (*except I suppose, like fiat currency, you can't take it with you when you die*).